Dear Rosie,

I was quite distressed to hear the things you were saying at Dad's the other day, and decided to write to you about it, but what started as a brief letter turned into a bit of an essay, so I hope you will persevere with it till the end.

I remember Paul saying to me many years ago "When you find the Buddha, kill
him".

If you believe in monsters, then monsters are what you will see.

Belief in a special connection with, direct access to or a special knowledge of the divine is not wisdom, it is conceit.

Belief that you have an infallible ability to 'feel' the difference between truth and falsehood is not knowledge, it is vanity.

Any good scientist or even a clever magician can prove to you how fallible all your senses are. The mind can easily be duped, and if you could acknowledge that this is possible the whole edifice of Steinerian mysticism will collapse around you, as it should.

Can you be aware of the feelings that make you want to believe these things?

Belief that you have knowledge of divine mysteries that the other 6 billion or so people in the world don't share makes you feel good doesn't it? Lifts your spirit, and makes you feel better than, superior to them.

You feel lucky, fortunate, to feel part of something that they are too 'ignorant/stupid/unaware/undeveloped' to be aware of.

A belief in the innate/inherent inferiority of other human beings is the first step towards fascism.

Truth is more important than feelings of self-satisfaction and superiority. You spoke recently about trying to stop the world going down the tubes. That is arrogant - finding an answer to the ills of humanity (and other life on this planet) is far harder than finding some magic mystical ability to see monsters/beings that aren't really there.

In only about 120 years from now hardly a single person living on this planet will still be alive, and that means that anything that can help humanity has to be real, lasting and do-able. The biggest handicap of your belief system is its conceit: - if you want to get humanity to change even one little bit you need to make them examine the things they believe and see what is wrong with them and why they cause conflict. And yet you can't even believe in your own infallibility. Why do you think other people will want to question their beliefs when you can't even see the possibility of error in your own? Even Steiner himself allowed that he could be in error.

By relinquishing the will to doubt your own beliefs you build a prison for your mind, and its only nourishment will be what is passed in through the bars.

It's easy to believe things when they satisfy the desires that we all have - don't be gulled by promises of knowledge and mystical ability - at the top of your organisation, as with every other, you will find people intoxicated with their status and their power - I could not believe how you asked me "why would people lie". There are a thousand reasons. The most telling of all is so that other people will not notice ones weaknesses and faults. Security is all.

Religions exist because they satisfy certain human needs to try and make sense of this world and this life. The succeed to the extent that they gratify these needs and desires, but there is nothing intrinsically special about any of them - if there were no Christianity, Islam, Hunduism, Buddhism, Shinto, Anthroposophy or any other of the faith systems of this world, there would be as many others that would take their place, because those human needs would still be there to be satisfied and there would always be other people or groups of people proffering answers, however simplistic or farfetched, that ordinary people will want to believe are true, or just as often they will be afraid to acknowledge their falsehood 'just in case'. People readily cling to anchors when they find life hard going, or when they lack direction.

Searching for truth is one thing, thinking you've found it is another.

Mind and heart are easily led astray by things that offer to make them feel more secure, and people are very suggestible.

"Know thyself", were the wisest words ever. If you are aware of your weaknesses - vanity, desire, wishful thinking, gratification and satisfaction of ordinary needs for companionship, acceptance, understanding, security - these are all traps for the unwary.

The history of anthroposophy and other sects is littered with the fallibility and vanity of other people who aspired to mystical revelations and divine or supernatural contact.

You implied that you felt confidence in the 'truths' you are being taught because you have a sense inside you that 'knows' right from wrong and that this can be 'developed' by the teachings you will experience.

That kind of certainty is the certainty of Bush when he thinks God speaks to him - and thousands of innocent people suffer.
That kind of certainty is the certainty of Koresh at Waco; of Jim Jones at Jonestown, Guyana; of Joe di Mambro and his Solar Temple; Aum Supreme Truth; People's Temple;

People may tell you that you are being trained to be more sensitive to
supernatural and invisible things Rose, but what they are actually doing is
magnifying the fears and cultivating the insecurities that all human beings
experience. That is not the way to the truth Rose, it is the way to madness.

Your aquaintance in America that committed suicide because he could not bear the 'knowledge' of the monstrous/ugly other beings that he perceived, should be a warning to you.  One
day down the line it may be you that is in despair from perceiving such
terrors, and perhaps you'll find it all too much for you. I hope that if such
a day ever comes you will hear your brother's voice in the back of your mind
asking you to come back to the real world. A life taken for such reasons is a
wasted life; wasted not because of real fears of monsters, but because of the imaginings
that all of us are capable of.

Belief in fairies and flower sprites may be relatively harmless, but Steinerism seems to ask for wholehearted rejection of reality in its quest to 'develop' your spiritual side, and that can be very very harmful.

I urge you to draw back from this and become aware of other possibilities.

With much love and concern,

Rob
xxx